# ppol6818-group-political-economy

## Contributors
- Ronin McCobb - Georgetown University
- Su Yeon Seo - Georgetown University
- Yosup Shin - Georgetown University
- Yuxiang (Nathan) Su - Georgetown University

## Problem Statement
Many US citizens now get most of their information on current events through social media sites like X, Facebook, and Instagram (Chen, 2023). This creates the  problem that social media is rife with misinformation (unintentionally false information) and disinformation (intentionally false information), making it easy for people to believe false information, thus affecting their ability to accurately participate in US politics (World Economic Forum 2024). Further studies have shown that communities with access to a local newspaper or news outlet show less political polarization, better engagement with local and national politics, and hold leaders and companies more accountable than in communities without a local paper (Stearns 2022). Unfortunately, since 2005, almost 2,900 local US newspapers have shut down, leaving many local communities without a local newspaper to get information from (Stonbely 2024). This leaves many US communities at risk of greater political polarization and a lack of reliable, trustworthy information. 

Chen, S., Xiao, L., & Kumar, A. (2022). Spread of misinformation on social media: What contributes to it and how to combat it. Computers in Human Behavior, 141, 107643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2022.107643
P. Darr, J. (2024, July 17). Does local news reduce polarization? Carnegie Corporation of New York. https://www.carnegie.org/our-work/article/does-local-news-reduce-polarization/
Stonbely, S. (2024, March 7). Roughly half of counties have one local news outlet or less. Governing. https://www.governing.com/management-and-administration/roughly-half-of-counties-have-one-local-news-outlet-or-less
Stearns, J. (2022, September 15). How We Know Journalism is Good for Democracy. Democracy Fund. https://democracyfund.org/idea/how-we-know-journalism-is-good-for-democracy/
Serrano, J. (2024, May 7). Disinformation is a threat to our trust ecosystem. Experts explain how to curb it. World Economic Forum. 


## Theory of Change
#### Research Question
Does the closure of a local newspaper create an increase in political and ideological polarization in the US?

#### Research Design
iven the nature of newspaper closures as a natural experiment, we will use a Difference-in-Differences (DiD) analysis to compare communities that lost a local newspaper (treatment group) with those that retained their newspaper (control group). This method will help isolate the causal effect of newspaper closures on political polarization by comparing pre- and post-closure trends while controlling for initial differences.

#### Methodology
1. Identify Newspaper Closures and Individual’s Partisan Identity

Using data from the U.S. News Deserts Database and the Cooperative Election Study, we will examine the change of trajectories in survey respondents’ partisan identity before and after newspaper closures. Closure will be defined as a drop in total circulation to zero or the disappearance of a newspaper from the dataset. This dataset allows us to identify counties that transitioned into news deserts (i.e., areas with no local newspapers) over the past two decades.

[The State of Local News Project, 2024](https://localnewsinitiative.northwestern.edu/projects/state-of-local-news/)

[Cumulative CES Common Content, 2024](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/II2DB6)

2. Define Treatment and Control Groups  
    - Treatment Group: Counties that used to have one or more local newspapers but lost them.
    - Control Group: Counties that retained at least one local newspaper.

#### Hypothesis
We believe that the closure of a town’s local newspaper will be associated with political polarization to increase over time. Without a local source of news, citizens will likely turn to other options like global papers, social media sources, or local word-of-mouth, all sources that are typically less reliable or less focused on local issues. As people turn to these alternative sources, we expect their behaviors to be affected by their contents, often driving higher probabilities of believing false information or less awareness of local issues most pertinent to their lives. If our theory is that local newspapers contribute positively to one’s political polarization and awareness of local issues, then we should see little to no change in towns where a newspaper continues to operate. 

#### Policy Implications
Our goal is to see what positive externalities are generated by a local newspaper, and what is lost as a result of a paper’s closure. If successful, our findings could support policy recommendations advocating for government or philanthropic subsidies to sustain local journalism. Given the persistent decline in ad revenue that has historically funded local news organizations, alternative funding mechanisms may be necessary to ensure the continued provision of reliable, community-focused news (Darr, 2024). This research could inform future policies designed to strengthen local journalism and mitigate the effects of misinformation-driven polarization in democratic societies.